Machine Learning and the Illusion of Art Without Artists [working title]

*Abstract*

The question of whether machines can make art provokes very different answers from pioneers in the field. Harold Cohen refuses to ascribe creativity to his art-making robot AARON, while Leonel Moura argues that since his "Artbots" generate pictures from emergent properties that could not have been predicted by their creator, "they have at least some degree of creativity." Although the question of whether machines can be artists seems to fall squarely on our definition of the latter, a solution to this philosophical impasse may ironically lie in redirecting the question away from the artist and toward the viewer.

*Who invents the art?*

[Add concrete example to start off the essay?: maybe we could use the example of afro-american trombonist George Lewis created in the 1980s a software called "Voyager" which he described in a few articles as a companion / collaborator.]
[JON: I'm unfamiliar with how that example might relate to this essay, but it is certainly intriguing historically!]

Harold Cohen (1928-2016) began working with algorithmic art in 1968, decades before the art world recognized artificial intelligence as a potential artmaking strategy. [add description of his work's evolution over time] During his 50-year collaboration with AARON, Cohen gradually refined AARON's programming to produce visual works of increasing interest to Cohen and the public he envisions for these works. In the process Cohen also redefined his own role, which has shifted from a programmer who sets rules for AARON to follow to a co-producer who serves as colorist for AARON's designs [describe current painting process]. Cohen speaks about this collaboration in terms that highlight the personal nature of this human-machine relationship:

"Creativity… lay in neither the programer alone nor in the program alone, but in the dialog between program and programer [sic]; a dialog resting upon the special and peculiarly intimate relationship that had grown up between us over the years." (Cohen, 2010; p. 9)

It is in special collaborations with humans, as in his own relationship with AARON, that Cohen locates the creative potential of machines. He dislikes the word "creative" and considers the attempt to model human creativity on a computer a vain effort:

"AARON will never make a choice to break the rules, nor will it reflect on those constraints as something that it might want to change… AARON has no sense of continuity or sense of experience from one drawing to the next" (Buchanan, 2001) (p. 17).

As psychologist Louise Sundararajan argues, "Cohen is explicit about what creativity is not: It is not simply divergent thinking; nor is it simply algorithms and symbol manipulations." (Sundararajan yearTK)

Artist Leonel Moura (born 1948), by comparison, is a newer recruit to the machine-human boundary. Moura began experimenting with artificial intelligence and robotic art in the late 1990s [CK], and since the 2000s [CK] has produced robots that make drawings based on color density [add description]. To explain his preoccupation with artmaking robots, Moura points to the long-accepted tradition of artists who have explored unusual processes in order to divorce aesthetic decisions from their own received knowledge and parochial tastes:

"Whether a work of art is made directly by a human artist or is the product of any other type of process is nowadays of no relevance. Recent art history shows many examples of art works based on random procedures, fortuitous explorations, objects trouvés, and arbitrary constructions. Surrealism, for example, even tried to take human consciousness out of the loop. More decisive is whether or not new art form expands the field of art." (Moura 2018)

For Moura, whether his art is made with or without machines is unimportant, so long as it is accepted by the art world's gatekeepers. This claim might have been controversial for artists of Cohen's generation, and he in many ways remained an outsider artist to his death. Moura's career, however, benefits from the expanded acceptance in the past three decades of a contextual definition of art first suggested by Marcel Duchamp:

"The main issue of art is art itself: its history, evolution, and innovative contributions. Anything can be considered art if validated by one of the several art world mechanisms including museums, galleries, specialized media, critics, curators, and/or collectors. Only in this way has the Duchampian ready-made and most of the art produced since been accepted and integrated into the formal art realm." (Moura 2018)

While Cohen throws a wet blanket on the possibility of art born of an autonomous machine, Moura makes room for robots to act with aesthetic free will, claiming "I teach the robots how to paint, but afterward, it is not my doing." Moura sees this as a positive, and perhaps inevitable trend, asserting that "the autonomy of machines is essential to the best interests of humanity." (Moura 2018) If the shift from Cohen's to Moura's viewpoint can be extrapolated to the longer term, it would seem the time will come when machines could make art independent of human agency. Composer Pierre Barreau is already feeding 30,000 music scores into a neural network to generate what he judges to be a neural network's "original compositions." Barreau looks forward to a time when machines, not people, custom-tailor scores for individual listeners: "What we're working on is to make sure that AI can compose hundreds of hours of personalized music for those use cases where human creativity doesn't scale." (Barreau 2018)

*Who invents the artist?*

Despite their generational and philosophical differences, Cohen's and Moura's descriptions of their process are united by a common focus on delineating the role of the work's creators, whether the human who writes the algorithms or an autonomous robot that has merely been educated by a human. Yet another, and in some ways more important, perspective on a work's creator comes from its viewer.

A thought experiment will explain why. Suppose proof came to light that the drawings and paintings Cohen had attributed to AARON were his sole creations all along, and that his videos of AARON in action were fictions designed to fool unsuspecting art critics. Such a revelation would not change who the true artist was, because that would have always been Cohen all along; but the revelation would have a huge impact on the reception of his work by lay and professional viewers. In a single stroke, we would look at a blue triangle no longer as the result of an inescapable algorithm but as the subjective paintstroke of a human artist. Some might switch from a judgment such as "not bad for a machine" to a judgment like "my four-year-old could do that." Others might turn from seeing the work as cold and sterile to imagining the work as the product of heartfelt emotion. In this sense, the "artist" as it matters for art history is not the actual person but the construct that lives in the minds of a work's beholders.

This is the argument of Michel Foucault's influential 1969 essay, "What is an author?" For Foucault, and many of the post-structuralist thinkers who followed him, an artist is not so much a body that lived in particular time and place as it is a conjecture which we attach to an artwork to help us make sense of it. Foucault wrote his essay in response to Roland Barthes' 1967 provocation "The Death of the Author," which denied any necessary relationship between a text and its creator. He argued that our interpretation of texts might not depend on knowing the biography and intent of the actual author, but that readers trying to interpret the text would infer the qualities of a hypothetical author nevertheless. To give a crude example, readers of Hemmingway don't need to know he was an adventurous war hero because his writing is already taut and muscular; readers of Marcel Proust don't need to know he was a sickly shut-in, because his writing is already introspective and full of reverie.

*The artist meta-function*

From this perspective, our central question becomes not "can machines be artists," but whether a machine can give rise to an "artist function" in Foucault's sense. Instead of the artist function disappearing when a machine makes art, it may be split in two. We might ascribe one artist function to the non-human machine--perhaps a limited one based on our understanding of the machine's finite capacity for reasoning. As of this writing, however, algorithms are still programmed by humans, and even neural networks are trained on data selected by humans. So we might ascribe a second, meta-artist function to the machine's human handler.

How is this different from simply giving both human and machine collaborators credit for the creative act, as Cohen suggests? Remember that the artist function differs from the artist because it is produced by the viewers. So yes, we might learn that Harold Cohen went to art school or that Jack Ox [first time we hear of Jack Ox: she should be introduced earlier. JON: Ok--I am trying to inject diversity into our artist examples.] studied musicology. But we might also look at AARON's bright shards of blue, green, and orange, and imagine that AARON's creator had seen Matisse's _The Dancers_. Or we might look at the fractured abstractions produced by Jack Ox's algorithms and infer that the woman who wrote them is interested in rhythm.

In other words, the nature of the artist and meta-artist functions and their relationship may vary depending on the analogies viewers are likely to draw from their own experience. One would be to see the machine as a tool, in which case they will construct a meta-artist who uses the tool in a more-or-less virtuosic or telltale fashion (as they might when examining brushstrokes in an Abstract Expressionist painting). A second might be the machine as a child--in which case, they will construct a meta-artist responsible for educating (setting rules for) the child, but not blame the meta-artist directly for individual actions (this seems to be Moura's perspective). A third might be to imagine the machine as a full-fledged collaborator, in which case they will imagine a meta-artist as someone who influences but is also influenced by the machine (Cohen's perspective).

*When artists and artist functions diverge*

As historical motivation, Foucault's "What is an author?" proposes that the concept of the author was required by a legal system bent on repressing writers of transgressive texts. During the Reformation, for example, Protestant critiques of the Catholic church mass-printed via Gutenberg's press did not bear the handwriting of their creators; nonetheless, readers could reconstruct the figure of the author from the tone, diction, and substance of each manifesto.

Despite legal incentives to identify individual writers, Foucault warns us that these reconstructions are fictions, highly contingent on the nature of the text and our own station:

"Nevertheless, these aspect of an individual, which we designate as an author (or which comprise an individual as an author), are projections, in terms always more or less psychological, of our way of handling texts: in the comparisons we make, the traits we extract as pertinent, the continuities we assign, or the exclusions we practice. In addition, all these operations vary according to the period and the form of discourse concerned. A 'philosopher' and a 'poet' are not constructed in the same manner; and the author of an eighteenth-century novel was formed differently from the modern novelist."

These projections, however fictional, wield significant power over our interpretation of art. As an example, consider the series of legal cases that called into question the copyright of nature photographer David Slater over a set of "monkey selfies" over which Slater had claimed full authorship. A 2014 case opposed him to the Wikimedia Foundation who counterclaimed that the works had no authors and were thus in the public domain. The photographer built his argument over the allegation that he had created the conditions for the "monkey selfies" to happen by setting up his material in such as way as to optimize the chances for the primates to capture their faces. The next year, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) filed a lawsuit against Slater in the name of one of the monkeys, claiming that the non-human animal had a copyright over the picture he had taken of himself.

From an aesthetic standpoint, the court's arguments put too much stress on whether the monkey intended to take a photo or not. What determines the artist function in this case is the reaction viewers have to the particular photos in question, in which a macaque stared self-possessed at the camera. In one the macaque appears to smile for the photo; in another it reaches out its hand to trigger the camera. To many viewers, these images suggested a deliberate self portrait. By contrast, if the snapshot triggered by Slater's apparatus had showed a blurry paw rather than an expressive headshot, the Daily Mail would have been unable to imagine the macaque as "fascinated by her reflection in the lens." To take a more extreme variation, if a photo of the jungle had resulted from a branch falling on a tripwire after a windstorm, few would have jumped to the conclusion that a tree was taking a selfie. Unlike these hypothetical counterexamples, the actual photos  precipitated a believable author function--and, just as is the case with a deceased author, we have no way of proving this construct true or false.

Yet we can also back up to the meta level and ask ourselves what Slater was trying to construct by positioning his gear in the way he did. Regardless of Slater's actual intentions, his "algorithm"--a tripod-mounted camera with a large wide angle lens and predictive autofocus--suggests that he considered the most revealing way to depict the creatures he was studying to be a stereotypical selfie--that is, a facial closeup taken at arm's length with extension distortion caused by the wide angle lens.

*Killing the meta-artist*

The argument made in this essay sets another obstacle in the path toward the truly autonomous artmaking machines imagined by Moura and Barreau. Apart from eliminating the human collaborator from the equation, such autonomy would also require expunging any residual artist function. Viewers have been conditioned for thousands of years to apply empathy and interpretation to imagine motivations for the creators of works they view, and they are likely to ascribe personalities to the machinic producers of such works as well.

The creators of Siri and Microsoft's Cortana exploit this empathic impulse to make their devices seem more relatable:

"We spent a lot of time with the character design of Cortana. It’s not about anthropomorphizing your computer, it’s about these little moments of playfulness, and these moments of recognition that she’s listening to what you’re asking her and what’s important to you." (Beres 2015)

If it's not about strategically anthropomorphizing your computer to encourage users to bond with it, then why do the leading digital assistants emulate the same appealing "personalities"--compliant, playful, and female? (citationTK)

Such empathic impulses may inevitably spur the viewer to construct an artistic persona for an art-making machine, but that hasn't stopped some AI innovators from trying to expunge any meta-artist function from the equation. Moura seems to reject the idea that a viewer would credit him for one of his ArtBot's drawings just because he supervised the training of its neural network [do artbots use neural nets? JON: I believe the reference indicates this?]. He offers the analogy that "No one will claim that a given novel is the product of the author's school teacher." (Moura 2018) This analogy may hold at some point in the future when artificial intelligences are accorded the same autonomy as human beings, but in the present they are more likely to be accorded the autonomous status of children or animals. And it is central to our construct of those personalities that they are highly influenced by their stewards; we are quick to blame a misbehaving child on his parents or a disobedient dog on its trainer.

[I am not sure if humans necessarily empathize with AI. they do anthropomorphize them but as Sherry Turkle studies on social robotics reveal, social relationships with artificial agents vary widely. children for example attribute emotions and display attachment to pet robots but they recognize that they are not like "real" pets. JON: As mentioned on the phone, let's add this to the text. It relates directly to the "synthetic ethics" broached by Ray's answer in the second paragraph below. Consider also how the movie Toy Story portrays the boy "Sid" as evil because he mutilates stuffed animals.]

Zoologist and artificial Life pioneer Tom Ray takes a more radical approach to eliminating a meta-artist function from his creation. Tierra is a self-evolving community of computer viruses with no fitness function apart from survival. To create this artificial ecosystem, Ray created an environment on his hard drive filled with snippets of program code designed to copy themselves with every cycle of his computer. He further programmed this environment to introduce random mutations in the code of these tiny programs. By competing for disk space, the resulting virtual creatures evolve according to the same logic of self-replication and mutation that drives biological evolution, generating new "species" that Ray never could have predicted. Ray himself claims that his creatures are alive by the very fact that they reproduce and evolve.

Yet as neutral and personality-less as Tierra seems, we may still wonder about the intentions of its human architect. Asked if he felt guilty turning off his machine and erasing all his digital progeny, Ray replied that he could always recreate that exact set of creatures just by resetting his Tierra program to the same initial conditions, arguing he had created the organisms only in the sense of creating the potential for them to exist. Reading this response, some may imagine Ray to a heartless psychopath, while others will judge him be a principled man of science.

Anthropologist Stefan Helmreich, who analyzed the artificial life scientific movememnt in the late 1980s and 1990s, argues that works such as Tierra are built upon a dualistic and computationalist vision of the living enabled by a "symbolically masculine collapse of life into instrumentally useful information process" which is indistinguishable from the historico-cultural context that he found at SFI (upper middle-class, judeo-christian white men influenced by New Age, sci-fi and Western creation stories) (Helmreich 2000, p. 216).

More important than the judgment itself is the fact that the question came up in the first place. Whether Tierra's critters are alive or inanimate, some viewers want to know the motivation behind the man who created them. At its most abstract, it is perhaps the same impulse that inspires cultures to look upon nature and imagine its Creator--the ultimate meta-artist.

[Footnote: see Ippolito 1999 for more on the extrapolation of ethical responsibility from AI experiments.]

*Conclusion*

The question we started with--can machines be artists?--is the wrong question. Art is not a measurable fact, like the temperature of bathwater; it is an interpreted condition, like whether bathwater feels warm or cold. As long as humans continue to infer motivations to creative acts, artists will exist as social constructs--whether we imagine them composed of flesh or silicon. [so what would be the right question? JON: How about something like "What roles does machine-made art leave for artists--imagined or real, flesh or silicon?"]

FOOTNOTES/REFERENCES

Helmreich, Stefan. Silicon Second Nature: Culturing Artificial Life in a Digital World. Updated. Berkeley; Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2000.

Jon Ippolito, "Should you feel guilty turning off the computer?" Artbyte (New York) 1, no. 6 (February-March 1999), pp. 16-17. Online at http://three.org/ippolito/writing/wri_cross_feel.html, accessed December 30, 2018.

One wonders whether Cohen's anxiety about the viewer's perception of AARON as the "true artist" in their collaboration might have been the reason he chose a more active role in their paintings toward the end of his life [research this bold claim :) ]

Damon Beres, "Microsoft's Cortana Is Like Siri With A Human Personality," HuffPost, 07/29/2015, https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/microsofts-cortana-is-like-siri-with-a-human-personality_us_55b7be94e4b0a13f9d1a685a, accessed December 29, 2018.

Leonel Moura, "Robot Art: An Interview with Leonel Moura," _MDPI Arts_, 18 July 2018.

Pierre Barreau, "How AI could compose a personalized soundtrack to your life," TED 2018 (April 2018), https://www.ted.com/talks/pierre_barreau_how_ai_could_compose_a_personalized_soundtrack_to_your_life/, accessed December 29, 2018.

UNUSED

"Art made by robots also raises other kinds of issues. For the moment, robots and their algorithms important criterion in evaluating artistic projects than personal ability. remain human creations. In this sense, it can be said that their artistic production originates in the will and skill of the human artist. But since robots like those I use are able to generate novelty, it must also be recognized that they have at least some degree of creativity....the resulting art works cannot be predetermined even by the person who initiates the process. "  (Moura 2018)
